Interview 11 2-4-25-06– Carmen de Apicalá (Severe bite victim)
[00:00:00.000] - Speaker 1
The tension of the liquids and the circulation don't arrive normally. So, within two hours, I already have inflammation, inflammation starts, inflammation and the harder I've stopped, the more inflamed. It even gets to the point where it's like the graft is going back in. So, that makes it impossible for me to work. Of course. Because normally, you have four hours that you have to go in a row. So that's where you go to work. It becomes impossible to work. Last night, I went to the prayer to say goodbye to the mass. I was in the What? I arrived at about 7:00 at night and lasted until 12:00. In the field or where? No, here at a friend's house. And it got really inflamed. That's where it is, it's inflamed. It's inflamed there. Does the young lady want to know where it is? Yes. She's going to tell you what it is.
[00:01:08.170] - Speaker 2
I have a project on snake casts at the University of San Diego, University of the Andes, in Bogotá. And I am Claire and I am American and I study people, knowledge about snake casts or experiences as well. And I also have an informed consent form. I have 10 questions for 10 minutes only. And because my Spanish is not perfect, I need to record the interview. That is if you agree to the recording. Yes, yes, yes. Okay. Can you sign here? And what would you prefer? That you tell me your name? Yes, or you can say your name and you agree. What do you prefer?
[00:02:06.530] - Speaker 1
What does the name tell me?
[00:02:07.760] - Speaker 2
Yes, okay. What's your name?
[00:02:10.770] - Speaker 1
Javier García. Javier.
[00:02:12.220] - Speaker 2
And do you agree with my questions? And shall we record it?
[00:02:18.390] - Speaker 1
Yes. And why is that?
[00:02:20.290] - Speaker 2
Sorry. Okay. Yes, the questions about snake bites. And more importantly, do you agree to be recorded?
[00:02:32.010] - Speaker 1
Yes. Yes, record.
[00:02:33.900] - Speaker 2
Okay, perfect. I'm sorry, my Spanish isn't good. No, don't worry. How old are you?
[00:02:45.040] - Speaker 1
I'm 52 at the moment.
[00:02:47.420] - Speaker 2
And what do you do for a living?
[00:02:49.320] - Speaker 1
I work in various trades, in the fields, with livestock, reaping, fixing fences, all kinds of field work.
[00:02:56.850] - Speaker 2
And you live here?
[00:02:59.190] - Speaker 1
Yes, at the moment, yes, sir.
[00:03:01.990] - Speaker 2
And are you married or single? Married. And how many years have you lived in El Carmen?
[00:03:09.170] - Speaker 1
Years in El Carmen, all my life. I mean, yes, I've always lived here.
[00:03:15.770] - Speaker 2
Can you explain more about your snake bite?
[00:03:22.990] - Speaker 1
What do you want me to say? Look.
[00:03:25.550] - Speaker 2
What happened? When?
[00:03:27.820] - Speaker 1
For me, that was on a Monday, Monday, February 5th. I went to the countryside. That year? Yes, last year. Last year. 2024. I went out to the countryside, I went to the path where we were born, where we were born, we have a little plot of land there, a little piece of land, and we had some cows, some little cows. And then I went to check the fence where they go down to drink water from the stream and I went down a little path, a normal little path that we call a bridle path, that we call, and I went down to the bank of the stream. And at that moment I went to the bank of the stream and I looked at what I was going to look at, which was the fence. I stayed there for a moment, I checked. And when I came out, the snake was already there, waiting for me. I'm sure that the moment I passed by, it sensed or felt me stepping on it, I don't know what happened.
[00:04:37.233] - Speaker 1
And it uncoiled and waited for me by the side of the road. How do they attack, is it through What do they call this? Body heat.
[00:04:49.380] - Speaker 2
Was it a farmyard?
[00:04:51.020] - Speaker 1
No, I was bitten by a snake, a size X. Supposedly the epidemiologist from Ibaguet, from the Tolima regional office, said it was a size X, but crossed with a rotten one, another snake, which is the one that rots you and that's fatal. And then that day it happened to me. I was coming out, when I felt it, it was when I saw something move and I jumped, but it was very fast. And it stabbed me here in this area, in this upper part of the muscle.
[00:05:28.920] - Speaker 2
That was great.
[00:05:30.650] - Speaker 1
The snake was about one meter ten centimeters long, if it wasn't that thick, it wasn't very thick. Because we, let's say, she stings me and she, wherever I get stung, she jumps. I was here in the group and she fell, pretend, let's say, she jumped from where she bit me to where she jumped, she jumped about four meters, three meters more or less, and fell into the water. And she came and rolled up again, rolled her tail down in the sand, in the water, and stuck her head out and barely looked at me and ready again. And I was looking at her, but I didn't have anything to throw at her or anything. I was kind of in shock, wondering: What do I do? Now what do I do? It bit me. It's my turn to carry the snake so that It's my turn to carry the snake so that the doctor can come in and decide what antidote he has to give me.
[00:06:30.040] - Speaker 2
Exactly.
[00:06:31.880] - Speaker 1
At that moment, my wife was standing by the side of the road.
[00:06:33.660] - Speaker 2
You killed the snake.
[00:06:36.110] - Speaker 1
Not at the time. I went out to the road where my wife was and she said to me: No, make a tourniquet. So she took the lace of my shoe and made a tourniquet here. She ripped me open several times, trying to get the poison out, because that's what it does, by chance, because I didn't have a knife or anything to cut myself with so that But anyway, she tried to do that to me, to help me in that way. I said: No, I have to kill the snake because I have to take it with me. So I went to a neighbor, a relative who lived ten minutes from where I was. So I got on the motorbike and I went and I invited him over. I said to him: Cousin, walk with me and I'll get you a snake. No, but how? I said: Yes, I'll get you a snake. Where to? I said: Down the little path that leads to the ravine. And he came with me, took a long machete and gave me a piece of it to look for it and we went to look for it.
[00:07:31.268] - Speaker 1
I said to him: Look, she bit me here, she fell there and here, on the little path where the hill goes up, which is the hill on the edge of the ravine, there's a little leaf that we call mouse's ear, which is like a garden, it's so tiny.
[00:07:47.300] - Speaker 1
Exactly from where she threw herself into the ravine, she came back and climbed out. And she was stuck in the rubbish, waiting, completely still. He arrived and swung the machete like this, when he swung the machete like this, looking for her, because we were looking for her. She came back and got up and was ready again. Then he took the machete and hit her first That was when we wounded her and we were able to throw her to the side, where we could see better and crush her head, because she was a poisonous animal and at any moment, to get her out, I didn't see, she could sting again. So, it was our turn. Yes, we killed her, we took her out in a bag and then they took me out. He came to take me to the doctor, here to Carmen. To the Hospital del Carmen, because my leg was asleep, it didn't respond anymore. I had already started walking... I went to the hospital. I could walk, but I couldn't, I mean, I was totally asleep.
[00:08:46.790] - Speaker 1
I came and he took me to the hospital. I arrived at the hospital, they took me to the ward and I waited for them to give me the antidote, because supposedly they had the antidote. And we called the doctor and the doctor said: They're not going to give me the antidote.
[00:09:04.800] - Speaker 1
To the nurse, sorry, I said: They are not going to give me the antidote. The nurse told me: No, not until the doctor orders us to, because if the doctor orders us to, there is nothing we can do. And then what happens? No, it's that your insurance has expired a month ago, you haven't paid the insurance. And to attend to you, you have to deposit 2,500,000 pesos. I had to pay first so they would give me first aid. But how? If I was paying for the insurance, I don't understand why I'm here. And they didn't give me anything. So, I told him: My daughter works for the fire department. She was here at the fire station at the car wash. They had the ambulance there. No, daddy, we've already called Girardó. So they called the fire captain and said: Captain, do me a favor, I've got my dad here, a snake bit him, they won't treat him.
[00:09:55.094] - Speaker 1
She said: Take him to Girardón. Lend me the ambulance. And I said: OK, go ahead. They put me in the fire brigade ambulance and took me to Girardón. They took me to Girardón, they treated me there and the doctor who treated me asked me: What happened to you? I told him: I was bitten by a snake, an XXL.
[00:10:13.410] - Speaker 1
But how? I said: Yes, I went like this, just like I told you, I walked a little way, it bit me and this and this like that. And the snake: Which snake was it? I said: Nothing of size X. How do you know it's a size X? Because I'm from the countryside. I was born and raised in the countryside, I know what snakes are like there. What's more, if you want, look, here they are. Because I was in the ambulance and the snake was in a bag next to me. And he arrived and he took it, he took it out and he looked at it. And then, he didn't ask me anything else, they just searched for the antidote and they gave it to me. And that night, all night, it was like that, he was like a robot.
[00:10:59.240] - Speaker 2
Did you have any pain?
[00:11:03.750] - Speaker 1
Yes, quite a lot. The pain more or less went away It was like the afternoon of the morning when I passed out. I mean, the same pain and so many drugs that they gave me for the pain and that, because nothing helped. From one moment to the next it went away and I fell asleep. I woke up again at six in the morning. Then the doctor arrived. How do you feel? I said: No, fine, doctor. It doesn't hurt anymore. I feel much better already. But relax, chinito, you're not dying anymore. From what he told me. I already... How do you say it? We already got through it. Then they sent me to the observation room and from there they sent me to the ward. And while I was in the ward, I stayed in that clinic, the Dumeán y Girardot Clinic, formerly the San Rafael Hospital, which was the first one, I stayed there for 18 days. During those 18 days, I had a doctor who checked me every day.
[00:12:12.991] - Speaker 1
She didn't give a damn about what was happening to me. She didn't take into account that the poison was necrotizing my skin. Inside, I was rotting like a piece of fruit. After 18 days, they discharged me and I went home, thinking that there was no longer a child to heal and that nothing more was happening.
[00:12:38.380] - Speaker 1
That night when I went to bed, at two in the morning, between one and two in the morning, I came down with a fever and a cold sweat. I got up and took two acetaminophen and went to bed. And in the morning, the next day, I felt normal. I felt that it hurt, but I didn't pay much attention to it It was a mild pain. I went back and took another two pills. I have a goddaughter who is a nurse. So, she was going to clean the house for me and do the healing, because the whole top of my leg had become necrotic. I have the photos and everything. So, when she arrived, she arrived at about nine in the morning to treat me. I arrived and I put my leg up, she took off the bandage. She took off the bandage and my leg exploded. And it started to come out ripening, ripening, ripening, ripening, ripening, ripening, ripening. And it kept coming out and out, and she said: No, padrino, she says to me: Padrino, it's time for you to go to the clinic again.
[00:13:43.439] - Speaker 1
You have a very bad infection. And now I called a relative here who has a car, I said: Hermán, I don't need you to take me to the clinic.
[00:13:53.800] - Speaker 1
They took me to the clinic and they went to check the spot where I was bleeding, and sometimes they'd find the source of the bleeding, and sometimes they'd leave the hole on the floor. Maturation and maturation and maturation. Then, there in that clinic, they told me that they'd already checked me and the insurance was active, because the insurance works for three months after you've paid, but I was paying. The thing is that there had been a delay in payment. And well, that's how it happened. From there they tell me: No, we already covered you for the emergency, it's your turn to go to where you pay for the insurance, which where I pay for the insurance is the EPS went to Mizanar. So they sent me to Mizanar, I went to Mizanar. And in Mizanar they sent me to A&E and in A&E they told me to wait and the security guard didn't attend to me. I was in a wheelchair because I couldn't stand, where it said at the bottom, that was the ripening pit.
[00:14:48.837] - Speaker 1
The ripening pit was where they sent me. They took me to A&E, they took me there, they took off the bandages, it was full, whatever they had. They came back and put them back on, what are they called?
[00:15:02.150] - Speaker 1
They would put me to sleep and I would come round and fill them up. And they would come back and change them, I would come back and fill them up. It was horrible. And that's how it was until the internist arrived, at 7 in the evening, imagine, I had been at it since ten in the morning. At seven in the evening, the internist arrived, he came and said to me: What happened to Mr. Javier? I said: Doctor, I have a problem and it's that a snake bit me, like this, like this, like this. Well, are you from the snake? Yes, sir, I am from the snake. He said: Come on, I'll check you over. He took and held this like this and said: You have about 350 centimeters of content in that leg. The leg is rotten. You should take it to the clinic now. You should operate, cut it open, see what happens. Then, at almost 11 at night, the ambulance came to pick me up and take me to the clinic, right there in Girardo, which is like going from here to the square.
[00:16:06.957] - Speaker 1
They took me there and admitted me and took me to a separate room, a bed all to myself, alone. And there they came and a doctor with a nurse came, and he said to me: "Are you from la Culera?"
[00:16:20.110] - Speaker 1
Yes, sir, I am. I said to him: Come on, I'll check it out. He took off all the bandages and he took my leg and he said: All this is rotten. I said to him: Don Javier, are you strong? And he said: More or less? Well, yes, then. I'm going to do it for you to rest. Rest from the pain and everything. I'm going to take out all that content. Then he started to gut it, to gut it. And that was the flow. He took out a white sheet that big, full of that stuff. I mean, it was red with blood and maturing. And he said: "No more, let's leave it at that for today. It was already coming out. Blood was already coming out with a little bit of matter. Then they left me like that, still. They changed the sheets, cleaned a bit of the leg and came back and bandaged me up. And I had to wait because the next day I was going to the operating table.
[00:17:19.394] - Speaker 1
The next day they took me to the operating table, they opened me up, they finished breaking it, they opened me up. You can't imagine how dead the flesh was. And that left me with part of the bone and all this muscle turned back into necrotic flesh. And they started to wash it, they removed the useless skin, the dead skin, and they started to wash it and to remove all the flesh, flesh, flesh, flesh and packaging.
[00:17:49.160] - Speaker 1
And they sucked, like a machine, and they washed that and that and kept sucking. And they filled the jars with damaged, necrotic meat, with blood and everything. And then the doctor said: They stared at me, there were three doctors, and you have to amputate the leg. You can't use that leg anymore. It has to come off. Then, as if by a miracle from God, another doctor arrived. He said: Come on, what happened? He looked at her. No, doctor, she has this, she has almost completely lost her leg. He checked her, looked, uncovered, looked. He said: Let's give it a chance. We'll do two more washes and see. If in two more washes we don't see any recovery, we'll amputate. And well, whatever my God wants. And that's what happened. And they left me alone. And they did the second wash, which always involved an injection into the spine to put me half-asleep. They did two, three washes.
[00:18:58.611] - Speaker 1
And every time they took me out, they took out a lot of rubbish, dead flesh, dead tissue, dead tissue Of course, I was wasting away, or rather, I was no longer wasting away, I was no longer even a bone, just this tendon from here down. When they'd done the fourth wash, and I'd already been through four washes, my brother, who was also keeping an eye on things, asked the doctor, because they weren't telling me anything anymore.
[00:19:34.060] - Speaker 1
Doctor, and how do you see it? What happened? Oh, no. It seems that the leg is evolving well, so we are going to continue to wash it and treat the infection, to try to kill the infection completely to see what can be done. So, they did that. They kept treating the infection, they removed dead tissue from two parts, they did two different tests, they gave me different types of antibiotics and they looked to see which one worked best. That's when they changed the antibiotic, because I was being treated with a really strong antibiotic, because where the gout hit me I went white, it burned all at once. So they changed the antibiotic and that antibiotic helped me recover faster. And then, when they saw that that antibiotic worked, yes, they continued to treat me, like, they took me. They even took it off because they gave me washes every two days. I mean, every other day they gave me a wash. After that, they put a device in me.
[00:20:50.948] - Speaker 1
They put a device in me that he I don't remember what it's called. It's a device, like a small motor. No, he injects liquid, it washes and on the other side it sucks and takes out. It washes and takes out.
[00:21:08.190] - Speaker 1
It washes and takes it out. On one side, serum. And on the other side, the little hose takes it out and takes it to a device with a small motor next to it. I can't remember what it's called. And they kept at it like that. Then they didn't do it every day and a half anymore. They backed off, they did it every four days, three days, I mean. Then they didn't do it to me any more, they gave it to me every three days, three days, I mean. Then they didn't do it to me any more, they gave it to me every five days. So there was an improvement. Until they said: Okay, the infection is over. We have to do the referral, because we can't do that surgery here, that surgery has to be done in Bogotá or see where we can send you, to a colsubsidio clinic. And I got the referral for Bogotá. From there, I was referred to the Clínica Roma in Bogotá, from colsubsidio.
[00:22:08.843] - Speaker 1
At the Clínica Roma the process starts again, because I arrive there, ready for surgery, sent from Girardot. In Bogotá, I am received by the doctors, the surgeons and physicians, they take me to the operating table to examine my leg, they bandage it, they check it, they see how it is, surgery. But that surgery can't be done here.
[00:22:32.340] - Speaker 1
That surgery means taking him to the north of Bogotá, to the Calle 100 Clinic, which is where they did the surgery. Because that's a surgery, they call it flap surgery, which is what they did on me. So, they keep doing the tests on me there until they do another full evaluation on me again. They do about four washes, four or five washes, and And from there they do the same thing, they take out two pieces of tissue and they come back and take it to In other words, for their own safety, they come back and do the tests to make sure there is no infection anywhere on my leg. So what do they do? They come back and do the washing, take tissue, clean all that tissue, which still has dead tissue and skin, they remove all that and take it to the laboratory for six days. After six days they give me the verdict: am I free of infection or not? After six days the doctor said to me: Mr.
[00:23:36.511] - Speaker 1
Javier, are you healthy, are you free of infection? We were able to control the infection, there is no infection, you are fit for surgery. Now we need to schedule the surgery. So, they said to me: Well, Mr. Javier, we are going to call the clinic on Calle 100, which is where you can have the surgery, and we will give you an appointment.
[00:24:02.560] - Speaker 1
And I went: Okay, wait, wait. They did another scan. When I became the boss, the surgeon who was with me in Plastic Surgery said to me: Mr. Javier, the surgery has been scheduled. From then until a month later. I had to hold on for another month. That was around March 22nd. Yes, in March, something like that. March 20th, 22nd. The surgery was scheduled for April 22nd. So, I had to wait and see what they were going to do. In the case, the clinic wanted to send me home, to come home or they would give it to me again in Girardón, to the Girardón clinic, because I belonged to Girardón. I said to her: Doctor, but how are you going to send me home with a wound like the one I have? Wherever it gets infected, I'll lose my leg. And who's going to answer for me? Me: No, but you've already had the tests, you're fit for surgery, but the thing is, your surgery is in a month, I said: But it's not my fault, it's not my fault, it's the clinic's.
[00:25:13.190] - Speaker 1
You're the ones who have to look at how they do the surgery, because I'm coming in for a surgery.
[00:25:21.690] - Speaker 1
So, between arguing with them and one thing or another, we went to the Superintendency of Health, letters were sent to them I mean, trying to get them to bring it forward for me. It wasn't possible. So, as a last resort, since it wasn't possible, the advisor from Call Subsidio came, who they sent me to. It was either I came home or they transferred me to Girardón. I said: Well, doctor, so we can sign you out. I told her: No, we're not signing anything, because if my leg gets infected and I lose it, it's your fault, not mine. Because I've been trying to save my leg, you're going to send me home. So, it's not right. So, I don't know what happened between them, but she said to the daughter, who was with me during those days: Well, if that's the case, then let's draw up a document and you take responsibility for my dad and you sign it, and we'll sign it and we'll leave.
[00:26:22.912] - Speaker 1
But you have us: No, we can't sign, I said to her: So, you are responsible because I come here for surgery and you are sending me back a month later, and I am in danger of getting an infection because I am where I shouldn't be.
[00:26:40.280] - Speaker 1
And then they talked among themselves, among the group from the clinic, the bosses and so on, and they left me there. I lasted a month. I lasted a month, a month there in the clinic, just sleeping and eating. They simply gave me the injection for coagulation, so that there would be no blood clotting. They gave it to me, yes, here around my navel. So, it was my turn every day. And they had me on a drip in case they had to put something in me. And they gave me pills so I wouldn't feel the pain at night, in case I did feel pain. And that's how I spent my time until the surgery. And they did the surgery. In the surgery they did it on the 22nd, the 26th, 26th, 27th they did the second surgery, which the first was flap surgery, which is what I'm telling you, and then came the plastic surgery, which removed skin from here to here to cover the bone, because the bone was bare, there was no skin, there wasn't enough skin to cover it and so they removed skin from here to here.
[00:27:59.957] - Speaker 1
And they also removed the flap of skin from here to here below, which is a flap, what they did to me.
[00:28:09.600] - Speaker 1
And until the present, I lasted about six more days in the clinic and they already discharged me and sent me home. And at home, on behalf of the clinic, they sent the Ibague wound clinic to the house. They came twice a week to dress my wounds. They came on Monday or Tuesday and they came on Friday or Thursday, they came again to dress my wounds every week, until it healed completely, the wounds closed. And what I have, look, I'm going to show you now.
[00:28:50.280] - Speaker 2
Wow!
[00:28:52.400] - Speaker 1
That's the trail of the snake, what I was left with. Wow! Look. Yes. This is the back flap, it's swollen there. Because that's the problem I have, the one that bothers me when I work. I haven't worked today, I've just been walking around here and I put my foot up every so often. There it's inflamed, it's hard. It's in the morning when I get up, as I sleep with my foot on some headboards, then it completely goes down. But during the day it gets inflamed. That flap comes from here. That flap has life here, under the leg. They connected the veins down here, which is what gives life to the flap, which is this. This is what the back is, it's from here to here. A big part of it died here. This part didn't stick, it died.
[00:29:48.870] - Speaker 2
And the bite was here?
[00:29:54.060] - Speaker 1
Yes, the bite was here, in this space, here. That's where she bit me. The funny thing is that she bit me very high up. I was wearing sneakers and she bit me here high up, the bite was here. But like this, I'll remove this. This was open and they put this flap here, this is the flap, and they put skin from here to here, and that was collected and it stayed like that. That's the story of the snake, of the damage it does.
[00:30:28.450] - Speaker 2
Strong, strong. Yes, and thank God you still have your stone.
[00:30:37.040] - Speaker 1
Thank God and the doctor who arrived at that moment and said that they were going to give me another chance not to remove the skin. This area from here to here, that's white. In other words, where they removed skin, that's left white. But it's about this wide. What they remove, they remove skin and they cover from there to there. This piece was what died when I got to the clinic, at the first check-up at the clinic in Bogotá. My son, the doctor, said: No, this skin is no longer useful. So they took a scalpel and cut it. And where they cut, that's where it stuck, look. He was left with this gap, because it was attached up to here. This flap went up to here. But as it died, it had to be cut. And it healed by itself.
[00:31:23.140] - Speaker 2
And are you in pain now too?
[00:31:27.250] - Speaker 1
Right now I feel sharp stabs. Like when the current catches you, from below, I feel strong stabs. They hit me at times, they get me fed up and it burns. It burns as if you had a little fire inside. But thank God, I have my leg there, it keeps me walking. I'm going to show you some of the photos.
[00:31:59.540] - Speaker 2
And how did you know to go to the hospital immediately?
[00:32:05.610] - Speaker 1
What do you mean?
[00:32:06.400] - Speaker 2
How did you know? Why did you go to the hospital?
[00:32:12.410] - Speaker 1
From here to El Carmen?
[00:32:13.400] - Speaker 2
Yes, in Carmen.
[00:32:14.460] - Speaker 1
Yes, because one in the anxiety and fear, in the anxiety of being treated and not going to I mean, it kills you, because if you don't get treatment in time, I understand that a snake can keep you alive for an hour or two, because it starts to form blood clots that reach the heart and that's when the poison causes a heart attack. If there is no immediate attention. So, she stung me at about half past five in the afternoon. I am here at the hospital at ten to six. Since they didn't give me the attention they were obliged to give me, my daughters took action and the one who works in the fire brigade got the fire brigade ambulance, which was the one that gave me the first subsidies and took me to Gilardo. Or if they don't leave me there, they don't apply anything to me. And I would have died there. But thanks to them, who acted quickly, they were able to save my leg. Yes, that's tough.
[00:33:26.820] - Speaker 2
Yes, yes. But the accident was in the afternoon, not at night.
[00:33:34.340] - Speaker 1
No, that was in the afternoon. That was at about half past five in the afternoon. Here I'm going to show you part of the series of how the process went.
[00:33:48.350] - Speaker 2
And when the accident happened, did you feel pain immediately?
[00:33:59.450] - Speaker 1
Yes, of course. Yes, there is pain. Look, I'll go and see him now. That's when he was in the clinic and it started to become necrotic. Can he see now? Yes. Can you see?
[00:34:12.940] - Speaker 2
Yes.
[00:34:13.840] - Speaker 1
Those are the first symptoms of the snake when the leg starts to rot. Maturation, fluids. And here you start to notice the lack. Look, if you see how the leg is getting, it's getting dry. And then, there, look at the snake. Because the snake also There's the... What a shame, wait a moment. There's the doctor taking it out with the glove. In the clinic, the day they took me. And this is the snake.
[00:34:48.620] - Speaker 2
Wow! Great. Yes.
[00:34:53.340] - Speaker 1
And it is sometimes like a triangle.
[00:34:56.650] - Speaker 2
Yes, exactly, one size too big. Horrible. Yes, they are horrible. But that one is very painful.
[00:35:04.340] - Speaker 1
And there's the leg. Here it is, when I was in the clinic. There it is. After they did the first wash, that's how it was. They didn't know it was rotten inside.
[00:35:17.170] - Speaker 2
On the first day?
[00:35:18.900] - Speaker 1
Yes, the first few days.
[00:35:19.800] - Speaker 2
Really?
[00:35:20.600] - Speaker 1
That's from the early days. Here, this part I showed you, this is when it already necrosed. From here, when they saw this, that's when they sent me for surgery. The first surgery, they took me to an operating table, but they didn't do anything to me there. They just cleaned it, which is when it ended up like this. Once there, after they cleaned it, it ended up like this. And once there, look, see where I was standing. These were the puddles I left where they took me that day. Where I was standing, that pool of blood was there. So, once there, And this is This is that in the clinic, yes, treating me. Look, look at the state of the leg. They were treating me there on a little chair, back when I was in the clinic. Look, you can see. Look at the hole where they pulled me out... They were pulling me out. And the leg was purple.
[00:36:29.880] - Speaker 2
Wow, great. Yes, I'm very interested.
[00:36:34.020] - Speaker 1
So, there I am. Here I was already in Bogotá, they had already transferred me to Bogotá, here I am in the clinic in Bogotá. Here I already have marked out the area where they were going to remove the muscle to enclose the graft. But after the doctor sees me, uncovers me, removes the bandage, he sees and says: No, this area of the body is not suitable. I have to remove an area from his back that I can use, which has the artery, which is longer so that I can make the connections I had to make. So, that's when I went to the clinic. Look, here is the back, where they remove I had already had the surgery there. There they already removed the piece of muscle from my back, which was the muscle they removed. It's more visible here. I have two drains to drain the fluids so that my back doesn't become inflamed. And all this is the surgery. These are drains that are left to drain fluids.
[00:37:46.091] - Speaker 1
That's part of what happened to me there. Well, here is the leg after the surgery, the first check-up with the doctor...
[00:37:56.780] - Speaker 1
Just a second, I'll stop her. I'll do something here. This is where the surgery is. Look, the surgery is done. Want me to take a look? Just a moment? Like a video, I was making it. The surgery is done. Look, that's where they removed the skin. This one falls off by itself, the cosmetologist tells me, it's the car. See how black it is?
[00:38:27.090] - Speaker 2
Uh-huh.
[00:38:28.430] - Speaker 1
Which is an impressive thing. There they were, they had already had the two surgeries. With respect, with the blessing of God the Father, I will heal. No, he's already over it. There I am talking to one of the nurses. And why such an important thing?
[00:38:51.800] - Speaker 2
Terrible.
[00:38:53.130] - Speaker 1
Yes, that's in Bogotá. In the clinic, already in recovery. Yes, yes. And from there to here comes the healing treatment done by the women from Ibagué. These are the girls from Ibagué who came every day to do the healing treatments, look. They came to do the healing treatments every day. By then I was already healthier. I was already healing. This is the nurse who came from over there, Carol, this is Lina, who was the one who came most often to do those dressings. They would dress my wounds, they would put on a kind of mesh that helps to call on flesh and heal much better. So, they would come and do that to me. So, that was already in the house. And every day And the other thing was until... Look, the leg is already healing much better. Here, this was the cream they gave me to apply to the wound, this cream had to... In other words, they brought it to me. 115,000 pesos' worth of cream, every little pot of cream was worth it.
[00:40:10.091] - Speaker 1
And every day they applied it to the wound. And they dressed the wound and it healed. Me and the rest of us are getting... Here it's healthier now, look.
[00:40:23.840] - Speaker 1
It's already dried.
[00:40:24.890] - Speaker 2
Dried up, yes.
[00:40:26.250] - Speaker 1
It's already dry. And this is the hardest part, which was where I Here at the back, which was where they found the veins, that's where I didn't want to heal. It was the hardest part to heal. It was the last one. The rest of it healed little by little. Until... Thank God, it healed. Yes, thank God. Yes. That's all there is to that snake bite. And so far, as I'm going, as you can see, I'm already better. I'm much better now, thank God. But the problem I have is that it's very difficult for me to work, because it gets too swollen. If I get here, for example, right now I was over there doing something, I arrive and I have to sit in a chair and put my foot up so that the fluids and blood start to return.
[00:41:25.950] - Speaker 2
Do you still work in the field?
[00:41:28.590] - Speaker 1
No, mother, at the moment I've been suffering for a Tomorrow I will have been suffering from this problem for a year. Tomorrow? Without working. Yes, right now I'm fighting with the insurance company to get them to pay me for the disabilities because they don't want to pay me. So, right now I've even had to get a lawyer to get them to pay me for the disabilities, because you live from day to day, but this problem has made things complicated for me.
[00:41:52.900] - Speaker 2
And if you work in the countryside again, what methods do you use to prevent a snakebite?
[00:42:05.440] - Speaker 1
The methods for one are How should I put it? It's the vision. Being very aware of where you are walking, taking into account the bushes, the little things that are always there. Because you find snakes in the least expected place. The snake is a creeping animal that you never know where you're going to find. For example, here in the countryside, if you live in the countryside, you go out to the pool in the field and they are by the edge of the pool because of the coolness, they can bite you. Under a pot with a lid on it, something underneath it, you move it and there's a snake, because that's how it is here in the countryside. The countryside is like that. Lots of rattlesnakes, size X, coral. There are several types of snakes, but those are the most poisonous and fierce.
[00:43:12.790] - Speaker 2
And in the accident, were you wearing pants?
[00:43:19.140] - Speaker 1
Yes, jeans. Really? I was wearing jeans, black jeans.
[00:43:22.370] - Speaker 2
And the bit about the pants.
[00:43:25.840] - Speaker 1
Her What do you mean? A pair of jeans. It just happens, because those are snakes, incredibly aggressive snakes. Even she, when I got stung, she got caught on the tip. She was doing this, trying to save herself. Because they use their tails as a support. Snakes use their tails to attack, it's like a spring, it goes back and forth. But she was left hanging. But when she seemed to lose her footing, that's when she sprung back and fell about 2 meters from where I was, she fell into the water. That's what the snake did.
[00:44:09.410] - Speaker 2
Yes, terrible. Wow, but thank goodness you're better now.
[00:44:17.680] - Speaker 1
Yes, it's a blessing from God to be able to feel good at the moment, because it's incredible I've worked all my life in the fields, in the fish market, riding horses, making fences, reaping, everything, I've done all the jobs that are done in the fields. And in the mountains, mountains, mountains. And I got bitten by something clean, because I was on a path that in that area, it's a bathing area where people go to bathe and everything, and people go in there. And the guy, as you say, the only one I wasn't lucky with was me, because I got bitten. And in that area they've already killed like four, from that same one, that they've found them. Because next door, on the side where I was stung, there is a plant nursery. And they did go to put the water to water the plants and about two or three days had killed one, before that one stung me. Then, further down, they killed another one.
[00:45:23.904] - Speaker 1
Over there, on the other side, there's a place where there's a bathing place, a trough where the carts go through the river. There's a part of it that was dry, they killed another one there. There are quite a few.
[00:45:40.230] - Speaker 2
Yes, quite a lot.
[00:45:42.350] - Speaker 1
And so, you always run the risk. In any case, when you're in the field, wherever you walk, you're running the risk of finding them.
[00:45:52.040] - Speaker 2
I think it's very important to share your story, because it's the education of the community.
[00:46:01.780] - Speaker 1
Yes, here you do And look, this year, this past year, there were loads of people bitten in this area by snakes. Children were bitten by snakes. I don't know, but you've never seen anything like it around here. We've never had anything like it around here. But I also get bitten. I mean, I tell myself that it's also because of all the burning of forests. Most of the virgin mountains that were here have been burned. So the snakes that were left over there in those areas have come down to the plains, to the areas where there are hamlets and small farms where there is livestock and everything, because even animals, calves, have died, cows bitten by snakes. Around here, for example, in this area, you never used to find scorpions, and now you find them everywhere, you find scorpions everywhere, we never saw them around here in the lower areas, and now you find them. So, I attribute that to the burning of the forests, the area where they have been drinking has been burnt.
[00:47:15.583] - Speaker 1
So, they look for a way to go down where it's not... And they look for cool areas, like houses, for example. A snake comes into the house and goes into the corner of the house.
[00:47:29.340] - Speaker 1
Because it has happened and it happens in many places. Here, for example, in Villarrique, a woman went to bed and woke up dead. There was a snake in the bed and it killed her. The next day they went to check and she hadn't got up and the woman was dead. And the snake was there under the bed.
[00:47:51.770] - Speaker 2
Terrible. But thank you very much for sharing your story, it's very important.
[00:47:58.510] - Speaker 1
Yes, miss. It's very important. No, my pleasure.
[00:48:01.830] - Speaker 2
I have no further questions. Yes, but thank God, he's better.
[00:48:13.280] - Speaker 1
Yes, that's right. It's a great thing to be able to tell the tale, as we say here. Because they are stories of life that one never thinks will happen to oneself. But at this moment, at this time, it happened to me.
[00:48:29.340] - Speaker 2
Yes.
[00:48:31.170] - Speaker 1
And, God bless me, to be able to get out of bed and walk again. Because, for example, when they implanted this thing, the doctor told me: You have two days. If in two days the body doesn't accept it, I'll have to operate again. Imagine, where are they going to get another piece like that from? I said: Maybe the other side, I don't know. Because you think about it a lot. Being patched up all over. That's bad, but thank God it didn't happen again.
[00:49:03.680] - Speaker 2
And hopefully you can work again too.
[00:49:06.910] - Speaker 1
Yes, well there we are waiting to see if the doctor tells me that the doctor who monitors me What's his name? The doctor treats me in Girardot and the surgeon who comes to see me I also go to the Girardot clinic for check-ups. She tells me that it takes about a year, a year and a half, for me to suddenly get better or I'll have the problem that it will always be swollen. So, the mission is to wait for my God to decide what happens, because there's nothing else we can do. So, we have to wait and let my God decide, because they've already done the surgery, they've already reconstructed it. Blessed God, I'm walking. But the problem is that, to work, you can no longer work normally, because then it becomes inflamed. And as it becomes more inflamed, the leg becomes harder. Because the skin is already stretched too much and you can see the stitches underneath the graft. That's bad, but well, there we go.
[00:50:32.230] - Speaker 2
Well, thank you very much.