Interview 107 2-24-25-02 – Manzanitas – Cuatro Esquinas
[00:00:00.760] - Speaker 1
What's your name? Janet Carta, on La Ribera. Do you agree to be recorded and interviewed? Yes. How old are you? 21. What do you do for a living, if you work? No, I don't work. Are you married or single? Yes, I have a husband. Do you have children? Yes. How long have you lived in El Carmen? Seven years. So, do you think it's likely that you'll be bitten by a snake here? Yes. Why? Because there are a lot of them around here. Yes, of course. Have any of your animals or pets ever been bitten by a snake? No. Do you know how to prevent or avoid a snake bite? No. And what would you do if you were bitten by a snake? Go to the hospital. Which hospital? Okay, I already saw that And if you need to go to the hospital, is it difficult for you or easy? No, we don't have a motorcycle. And would you trust the hospital in Carmen to treat a snake bite?
[00:01:10.268] - Speaker 1
And would you trust other hospitals as well? Yes, too. And where do you feel you are most likely to be bitten by a snake? In the countryside or at home? In the countryside. Why in the countryside? Because there are more... Like the dangers of the countryside. And do you know how to tell if snakes are poisonous or not?
[00:01:36.560] - Speaker 1
No. No? No. And do you know of any cases of snake bites? Yes, Mario's cousin. Here in Carmen? Yes, in one that was. And did she or he go to the hospital? Yes, three months in the clinic. And well, no. I don't have any more questions, but do you have anything else to say about snakes or your knowledge or anything else? No. Well, the most important information is that after a snake bite, it's important to go straight to the hospital and it's important to know what kind of snake bit you, because there are different antivenoms for different snakes. You can take a picture of the snake or you can kill it and take it to the hospital. And yes. Well, I don't have any more questions, but thank you very much for your time.