Interview 147 3-03-25-09 – con’t -- Cuatro Esquinas
[00:00:00.000] - Speaker 1
She would have gotten stuck. And he stepped on her, and since she was riding in that little truck, I turned her over with my little finger. And she turned around and saw that she was stuck on top of the other one. She grabbed a stick, she hurt herself badly, she grabbed a stick that had a big knob on it, and today she So she wouldn't leave, he left her there. Then they called me, because I was here in the house, in the bosses' house. They called me to come and look. These guys had already given us a lot of trouble, the ones who came before, Diego and Charlie. I didn't recognize her. I didn't do anything for her that night, and I didn't recognize her. She was still alive, I finished her off and then I cut her open with two small knives, and the two hooks came out, and they came out many times and said, "Yes, she's poisonous." And she got worse and worse, later on, I saw her getting worse, and later on, she got really bad.
[00:01:10.050] - Speaker 1
In the end, we saw her being operated on that night, at one in the morning, they took her away. It was the whole pandemic, imagine.
[00:01:20.020] - Speaker 2
It's terrible that she was so ill.
[00:01:22.590] - Speaker 1
That there were no beds, that there was no That there was no sweater that was mentioned there, that there was no ambulance. It was a bit strange, thankfully neither the boss nor any of the children were there.
[00:01:33.210] - Speaker 2
And what are you to Guzmán? I'm his husband. Yes, see, I would have spoken badly of you. Yes. Keep quiet, won't you? I was talking about Guzmán, wasn't I? See what I meant? I enjoy coming in to hear this language and see what they're going to say. Yes, I realized that, because Eduardo and Adriana told me, because they always leave cheese there for him. By the way, I want you to bring me some milk tomorrow, let me know if you want. Milk? Yes, milk and cheese, that guajada. How much milk? All of it.