Interview 66 2-17-25-01 – con’t - Patio Bonito
[00:00:00.000] - Speaker 1
Yes, how did it look? It looks really good. Yes, and it had 14 bells. And he said, "He passed by and saw it, just its little tail was hiding there by the fence." And he said, "I don't have anything to" It got away, and he came here and told me, "A snake just went by there." It doesn't like people because they're the ones who are in danger there by the fences. It came back and there it is again, he said: "She's back, the poisonous snake, she's waiting there in the playhouse." He changed the others, they ran away. Look here, yes, that really scares me. And that burns, they tell you to burn it, burn it, but it's not always necessary. And even more so now that it's started raining again. Yes, look for more houses. For the houses, it scares me sometimes. When I'm here at the door of the room, I put a rag there when someone is in the kitchen, because what if someone is having lunch, eating, and they go over there to the bed and...
[00:00:52.369] - Speaker 1
I always have the light on and everything so that I don't... If I couldn't kill it and take it with me, at least a photo.
[00:00:59.180] - Speaker 1
Yes. Look, that man Carlos, who was the one who came the other day. They helped me when a friend of mine was bitten in the kitchen, in the village, by a poisonous bug, I don't remember what it was called. Mariposa, it had a butterfly on it. It was like a butterfly on the label. And I asked the boy, because you ask these things, and he said, "Oops! It's poisonous." Right away, I said, "How am I going to tell her mother it's poisonous?" If the lady had given it to her, I would have been very nervous. But anyway, she killed it, the Chinese woman killed it, and if it wasn't poisonous, the poisonous snake took it away. And she didn't tell her mother because her mother was sick. But they put her on an IV and she didn't have to go there. No, thank God, no. It was all quick and she didn't have to stay in the hospital overnight and they discharged her.
[00:01:48.010] - Speaker 1
And the girl was fine because my mom was really sick for a long time. And it took my mom a long time to Yes, a long time to not... My mom came back around eight in the morning, seven-thirty, and we left Carmen at 11 in the morning.
[00:02:01.490] - Speaker 1
My mom had all this in her mouth, it was like she had eaten flour, it was all white. And I said to her, "But mom, why do you have all that saliva?" The girl said to me, "But we all have saliva, we just don't have it like that." Then José was there, in the second round, and he said, "The poison. Get them to come quickly," but they wouldn't let me leave. And I said, "No, I'm no good at fighting," and they wouldn't let me leave either. When we got to the second round, they didn't give her the serum immediately, but luckily it was quick. My mom got very sick as soon as they gave her that. It left her unrecognizable. Look, even now, since then, my mom's leg has wounds that last for almost a year. And it's not sugar, because we've checked her sugar levels. And my mom feels And that's exactly where she was bitten, on that side.
[00:03:04.465] - Speaker 1
She has scars and scars, but those wounds last a long time. Did she put a tourniquet on? Yes, they put one on her. And did it turn brown?
[00:03:14.910] - Speaker 1
No, she didn't get pregnant. I didn't think so. I mean, they put some pads on her for some reason, but that's okay. But no, she tied herself up. Okay, good. Because they told her not to tie herself up, because my mom and my mom arrived at the school and the promoters were there and they took her away on a motorcycle. But she didn't leave Carmen, because it was quick, bringing her there was quick, but taking her away, sending her away, yes, otherwise And I say, in the end, like blood clots in her leg. A lot of time to take care of her. But thank God, it didn't get any worse, because so many times things get worse. Okay, yes. Yes.