Interview 169 3-06-25-08 – con’t – Cuatro Esquinas
[00:00:00.610] - Speaker 1
That it was Yuna, and that they killed a big one in Mateguadua, and that she had hair on her face. Who killed her? Brian and Chapol killed her. Today? Yes, yesterday. Yesterday, the day before yesterday, Brian told us here. And they said in the Guadua bush: It smells like a snake, like the smell they give off. We always said it smelled like eggs. And he said, "The snake must be far away." There were a lot of mosquitoes in the Guadu bush, and they had a bonfire that they poured gasoline on and lit. And they kept chopping and chopping. Then one of them said, "I'm going to go find a hook or something to throw more trash on the fire." Then, when Brian turned to look, Doña Chipa was right there. But he was already with his head down to throw something, but he was identifying the source of the fire. Then he said, "Look, she's not looking at us, she's looking for the fire.
[00:01:12.611] - Speaker 1
Turn around with that stick you found, because you found it to throw trash on, so you don't have to pick it up with your hands. And you turn around, in case she looks at you, then I'll be ready to hit her on the head with the stick or the machete."
[00:01:33.950] - Speaker 1
So he left and turned around. And of course, snakes have radar. So the snake identified him because he moved. And the other one stayed here, still. And when he swung the machete that he had already used to kill the one next to him, the comb came off, but he managed to cut off a piece of his face. So, it was left there, kind of writhing, and that's when they hit it with the stick. He says it was huge. Then they threw it on the fire and doused it with gasoline. But he said, "It had hair, but it was an X." Did they take a picture? Who knows. They say they hugged each other and were both shaking. I tell you, it's one thing to tell you about it and another thing to tell you what that animal was like. We're more cowardly, we would have run away and not even killed her. But they hugged each other when she was already How scary. No, and they were right there.
[00:02:51.999] - Speaker 1
But she was looking at the fire they had. I'm sure she was trying to fan the flames. Or maybe she was jealous of the flame, right? Yes. They say, "No, and you with those short boots?"
[00:03:08.760] - Speaker 1
No, with rubber ones, but they don't protect you from a big bite. Like the one that killed him? Because that man was bitten, up there on his mouth. The cat that killed him, the one you showed me, that one Those ones you need, it's a little piece where... Those protect you, but not a big one. One day out there in the sheds, I went to pick it up like this, I grabbed the broomstick and touched it, it was all chipped. And right away it got alert, sure that I was going to touch it again, but I touched it, just one quick swipe. That's what I did... Well, it needs more. Thank you very much. And for the interviews or now? No, I don't have any more.